He
had written a lot about my experience in the past.
When he took me there, and he was taking me there, he
was only 20 years old. He had a sort of age
difference. .
. . . . .
. .
After the ouster of Prince Sinepa, what effect did
the new government have on Cambodia's
relationships with the communists in the USA? Did
Long Nol change the policies with dealing with the
communists? No. At that time, after the ouster of
Prince Sinepa, and
Donald was the Prime Minister, you know. And we
tried, you know, we tried to maintain our
relationship with communism, and we asked to
renew the relationship with your country. But
your country has suffered, but the communism has
suffered. We are willing to do that. On that time,
not only the community
science. Right. Were y'all still trying to
continue your policy of neutrality? Yeah,
because now we know All the Portuguese have some
problems,
not really good, you know, but now we know, we study
the best ways, that's all. Because if we don't like
to have American base or Russian base or Chinese
base or Cambodians, to build our economic
province.
Did you and Long Nol have the same goals for
Cambodia? Yes, we have the same goals for
Cambodia. But
overall, y'all worked well together, would you
say? What
was your reaction? to the April 1970 invasion of
Cambodia by American troops. This, you know, this
bad propaganda
from communists,
really, we are going to go to protect them, you
know? Why jump
from the attention? We ask you to go to heaven. But
we have to fight with the government. We don't like
that. We don't accept that. We know about that. We
don't like to accept that. the
government to let the Chinese occupy the border of
the country.
We don't like to accept the government to let the
military transport the ammunition or food across
our country. So
did you consider Americans'
invasion more as a protection measure for
Cambodia against the communists?
Unfortunately, last time I didn't let, because my
country is the last country, you know, we're going
to have, you know, another time, another time, a
lot of involvement in the Congress here, you know.
We don't let the American troops go to Cambodia. We
don't let the Cambodian, you know, to planning or
something, you know, military American to plan.
They had to send our soldiers to plan Vietnam and
Thailand and all countries, you know. And I talked
to, at that time, I was in Phu Quoc, I know if you have
some Phu Quoc and all countries to send a
technician or some military Cambodian to Paris,
So
were you expecting more support from America than
you actually got? You know, but unfortunately,
you know, a lot of the congressmen was against the
war, you know. But I, when I go to church, I agree,
but don't forget in your religion, the best way to
protect your country is to attack, you know. If you
are afraid to attack, you know, He had
a lot of power. And now, you know, the people are
happy about that. Reagan, now, he's afraid to say,
I'm a gun, Grecia. I'm a gun, Greece, no. I'm a gun,
this country. I'm a gun, Malaysia. People don't
know. You do something, but you never say. You're
afraid to say something. But that's what the
communists do. He answered America. He answered
China. He answered all the countries. He said, oh,
that's good. He said, you know the paper, the paper
type, you know? This America is paper type. You
understand what he said? The type? The type? Yeah.
Paper type? Yeah, paper type. Yeah. That was
before Reagan's time. Yeah. Now you think Reagan
is more supportive. Yeah, about the politics, you
know, about the prestige, you know. More than the
support, you know. So if America had supported
Cambodia more, you think y'all would still be an
independent nation without communists? Yeah. Do
you... Can you... estimate how much protection
that would have been, how much involvement it
would require? You know, I talked at that time,
when I was pregnant, 19, 17, all of them. I received
the vice president in my capital country. I'm new.
I tell him, You work too slow and too much, you know.
When you spend $1, $2, and the company,
they spend... Diljana,
Diljana. That's the white girl, Prudhana Nagar.
And you know, you remember the problem, Chiku
Sorokki, Omani, or something. The problem is that
the people here are very good. But what did the
communists do? What did the communists do? And why
all
the people with arms like this in 1967, 1963, 1968,
do you remember? Which one? Cuba? No. We say, and
why? Because the people, they protest. Then they,
like, pull up now. They are white, old, good, old.
Airplane, town, all things. And he flies. And
about a month, he's finished. They go back. They
don't lose time. They don't... They have
prestige. They don't lose any prestige. My
brother and you, let me know. Oh, you talk like my
mother. Yeah. No, I... Something too much,
something
extra is not good. Even freedom, too much freedom
is not good too. Too much speech is not good too. The
best way, we have to do something for the best for
the people. When you have too much freedom, That is
the
opposite.
You don't have any discipline,
you know? When your family, you fight your father,
you fight your mother, you don't respect them, you
know? It's good. Oh, you have to adjust that, in my
opinion. In my country, you know, when I was a
secretary of the country, It's hard for me to
find a market to sell rice, to sell corn, to sell all
the food. Beautiful. Because we hire a lot, it's a
good plan. But with more than three years of
employment, we don't have anything to do. Oh, if we
don't know how about the employment, we don't
understand. You know, this year in China, people
for 50
years,
50 years, by Bapu Dukkha, you know what I mean?
Because they don't know how to do it, right? You
know, it ran in my home, my family, but it did not run
here. And you cannot order the people, oh, grow
rai, kumaro, right? They grow in some village, you
know what I mean? You cannot do that, you know? In
the Bapu Dukkha, it's different, you know? Even
your country, people from Tennessee, they're
different from Thailand, and from Texas, they're
different from all the states. And you are, you're
from Thailand, maybe from Myanmar, or from Hong
Kong, or from Poland, from Asia, little, little.
You are American, but American, but your costume,
you have to... to deal with your grandmother. It's
true.
Yeah.
How much of advantage do you think the South
Vietnam
help that they gave to Cambodia, was that a big help
to y'all? This South Vietnam
military aid that Cambodia received, was that
very beneficiary? You know, this, I don't know. We
have three steps, you know. First step, we have
five countries. North Vietnam is called Tocan.
Central Vietnam is called Annam. And South
Vietnam is called Kuchangshir. And we have
Cambodia and Laos, five countries. You know? And
the first step, the war, when the French
government loses the war, they make a mistake and
beat from, not from your country, but from
England. They said, maybe we We let them unify the
three countries. Maybe he satisfied. He don't
like to be communist. No. And you know, from 1954,
you know. But now, instead they happy about that,
they don't like the annex. No, they don't like the
annex. You know, Laos and Cambodia. You know, Laos
and Cambodia, you have a kingdom. You know what I'm
saying? Because, you know right, the ambition is
going to be big, big, big. Now, you know, Vietnam is
the service of the war,
of the military. Now, you know, now, because they
have all arms, you know, built by Christians. left
by you, you know, around the world, from all the
countries. And I said, in the next step, he would
like to arrive in Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia,
Indonesia. You know, now we can arrive in Thailand
in one day. You know, now we have how many million
soldiers? I
see
now the most soldiers in
the world, you know, because they are still
soldiers now. But, you know, all events, you know,
before, you know, the time of Napoleon in France,
you know, basically he was in coma, but, you know,
he cannot, you know, Confirmation
by the sun, you know, the victory. And now we have
combat inside between the dirja, inside between
the people, the economy, the public, and the
Chinese people. And now we stand inside. In
the last year,
we made us a world country. Like Europe, a large
world country. Like Africa, all small. And
you
know, most of the products they use to build atomic
bombs, to build something, to buy something,
everything, you know, you come from, from other
countries, 99% from Africa or other countries.
When they put it all down, and they don't know how,
Why you have
a red system? Now you have internet again? Of
course, you focus and take over. What? Not get up,
you know? No, like that. Have to fight, have to
fight. Me, still, brother, many people I heard,
why, why? People like to send money, why they send
to place to stay here? What? If they don't know,
it's very dangerous to stay, you know. When you
have to find your neighbor, you have to help them,
or you prepare to evacuate your home. It's very
dangerous. Hello, can I have you? Good to have you.
And if you pass me all the questions, you try,
prepare, and if you have time, I can talk. But
again, for you, it's the best, you know. Yeah. Now,
you come to this. Oh, yes, okay. What line of
propaganda did the communists use to infiltrate
Cambodia? No. I
know you've
already
discussed a lot.
Yeah. This is the same use and the same propaganda,
subversion, you know. You know, you are poor, you
are low-potion, you know, and we don't have any
freedom, we don't have any justice, you know. and
everyone supported, all the rishis, you know, now
as a whole. How did they get this message across?
Because I was reading that the newspapers in
Cambodia weren't like the newspapers in America,
where everyone gets one. Oh, no, no.
You know, the
people in Cambodia, we don't have enough
Newspapers,
you know. You know, the most of the educated
people, professors, educators, thank you for
saying. So it was
through
the educated
class that propaganda
spread. Yeah. you know, for the first day,
you know, before, a
bit before the
invasion
of Cambodia, most of the students from Chinese
schools, even the girls, they like to go to the sea,
you know, and all the schools, And
when they come, they talk away for
the first time, they kill, they kill, kill, all,
all the little people. Yeah, because they go
missing. He said, you have to chant.
Purification. Yeah, purification. This is the
way, because they believe to us more than some
others. But you
know, like, I come with my friends to fly for
Whitehounds and I want to do it here. You know? So,
when someone would like to be a squadron, when they
like to have some fun, they like to sail, use a gun,
boat and so on, a squadron. Oh,
you know, go to like some
food, you know, some food for them, some
cigarettes. Go to have dinner or lunch with them.
Go, I'll show you, see if you, you know. Only this,
you know, through the orientation from why I'm
saying. This will let you eat. together, like
the
communists,
you know. And before you go to work, no, not good.
Before you go to work, when you get so-and-so, oh, I
do, I do, this is my, this one, the best car, you
know, cheap, pretty nice car. You have to accept,
you know, and me and my friend, We explain what we
don't like
to believe, we explain to them, but they're not
really happy. You don't need to read much in the
newspaper, but you probably don't have that
practice, and you don't like to believe. Before
the cross. We
don't
have really good
people.
My country is the best because both modern and the
person that have land, have farm, and have a house,
different from other country, you know? We
live... Yeah. And we can talk about that on this,
you know? And now they regret, you know? And my
country is like, you don't have any money. to
travel around the country. And at night, at
lunchtime, you go to ask to eat, to pray, to pray, to
pray, to read. And then you would like to stay, to
pray, to night, to read. You can't stay here before
the war. This is a very good country. The
communists, they
were right to be a big country, they were right to
have a good land, healthy land, you know? Because,
you know, most of the people are communists. And
so, you know, communists, they are pro, right?
They say for the communists, what to do so? They
kill themselves. They kill themselves. because
it said that we make a mistake, you know? And now in
your country. It's
the best thing I've ever spent. The people, most of
them, like, come back to the museum, so I meet with
them and have a good time. So, thank you for that.
But the company, the company, you know, thank you.
Oh, God, oh, my people, oh, so beautiful. But,
uh... Do
you feel that if Cambodia had had a stronger
communication system where y'all would have been
more personally in contact with the people of
Cambodia where y'all could have told them that
these were lies that they were receiving, do you
think it would have prevented them from this? Yes,
yes. I explained to you very well. And before, I
don't believe. I believe maybe he made a mistake.
He did something not good, but not at all. Now, he's
separated. from
children, from the wife, from the husband, what to
do. He said, it is for young people and the world,
but you know, He said
that he had
a
lot of pregnancy with the dear young. And when he
grew up, you can see what he was thinking. He had a
lot of corruption. And the people don't have
anything to do with it. But the family of the...
People in high
position, they have too much good things. Not
this, this, not, oh, not good. And the people now
don't, don't try to do. They don't believe more,
you know, because they know themselves. In
that sense, you are like someone who, what you
said, you have a relationship with the world.
You're young, you know. Most of them. Each one of
them. Okay, um... How much did Senehook's
affiliation with the communists contribute to
their takeover? Them using, being able to say that
was supporting them and that they were fighting
for Sinahook's policy. Yeah, I think the power of
the responsibility of the Sinahook for that is
really big. You know, we were very good. Right.
Inside, outside, you know. When we had war with the
Nicaraguanas, and the Nicaraguanas, you know,
the Nicaraguan people don't like the
Nicaraguanas. They don't use
the name of Congress. They use the name
of the Sihanouk and take care of all this stuff. But
this Sihanouk, he don't know. They use him like
this, rather than he know this Ula and Sihanouk. Do
you think the communists would have succeeded
with the invasion without Senebuk's
affiliation with them? No, no, no. No. So that was
the only way communists could get a hold of
Cambodia. The people don't drop the bomb. They
say, no, we won't be cold. What does it look like?
How
do you, now that communists have taken over
Cambodia. From reading your article, you
definitely see a free Cambodia in the future. What
are your goals to achieve a free Cambodia? What
steps?
is one of
the fundraisers of the United States movement.
And now we have a movement, and we have a
government, a coalition government, and we have
more and more support. And now, all the countries
in the world help us. to call
to
the
government group
to withdraw as soon as possible from our country.
And after that, you know, he asked the United
Nations group to tell us, to ask the security to let
the people join the new regime by election,
re-election under international control.
So if a free Cambodia is established in the future,
your policy will continue to be one of neutrality?
Yes, because we have to use that name, I think,
because they are afraid somebody, they don't go
like they say, oh, you are American, you are
Christian, neutral. They have more support. Will
y'all be able to uphold a policy of neutrality with
the communists being so close? Yeah. Is that a big
problem, a big threat? Yeah, yeah, but I think the
first step we have to do is that the political, you
know, yeah, because we cannot use all the
political difficulties. But when we provide to
Seoul, to the poor, We don't like to be enemy of
communists, you know, too much, run with the
reward. Will America play a major role in Cambodia
achieving independence? Yeah. I think now we have
more and more, you know, Ladies and gentlemen, he
was sitting. He was
dancing. And then we were in Indonesia, and he gave
support to the company. but I think that we don't
need it. Like Vietnam, to send approval, to send
something, as you call it, political, as you call
it, to add something to another country, you know?
I think that we don't need to send approval, to send
something like last fall, last night. Will it be
more of an internal yeah change yeah because
you
know now If
you tell us to not go there, you know, I don't want to
be involved directly, you know, because we are a
big country and we see, you know, like, you know,
the war, you know, nothing, you know, not to be
involved directly, you know, but most of the
people are in this country, you know, and I just go,
you know. I
think with more Brazil,
now we have a Brazilian economy. All of Vietnam, we
need more and more of that economy, you know,
because we have a lot of... you
know, you ask Thank
you. who
will
take care of yourself first. But also, you have
some children who are difficult, you know, for
people, both the country's young people and the
children now who are difficult to counsel. One
last question. Do you Do you see any similarities
with Cambodia and America as far as communist
propaganda is concerned?
Since you've been here for a while now, have you
observed any communist propaganda that you would
consider very dangerous to the American
government? Yeah. I
heard,
you know, I don't know, from my side, but I heard
from a few, I don't understand, from a group of
Americans, from South Americans, communists,
like that, and some on Chinese or Vietnamese or
some of the other people. Why is
that? I don't know. I don't like to say it. But I said
it. I don't want to say it. I don't want to say it. I
don't want to say it. I don't want to say it. I don't
want to say it. I don't want to say it. I don't want to
say it. Yeah.
Very dangerous. I
don't do it because, you know, my country is going
to be communist. But before the communist war,
part of my freedom, I know it's not going to work.
And when they run, they let them... a
grand list of the territory from Tonkin, North
Vietnam, to Annam, to Kuchanshin, to Pao, to Nha
Trang, to Nha Trang, to Nha Trang, to Nha Trang, to
Nha Trang. You know, you said that many people in
Singapore Oh,
we don't like to have God's life. We have nothing to
give to God. We like to have peace. This is true. But
we don't like this. We don't have peace. Some,
some, some, some, some, some, some, some, some,
some, some, some, some, some, some, some, some. He
had more and more and more and more. He had this one
more and more and more. He was a very talented
person. He was a very talented person. He was a very
talented person. He was a very talented person. He
was a very talented person. He was a very talented
person. He was a very talented person. He was a very
talented person. In
Cambodia, is again established as a free nation,
will y'all certainly be more wary of your
communist neighbors?
Will
y'all work harder to protect yourself against
them? Even though y'all have a policy of
neutrality, will y'all be more...
You know. Alert to the danger. Yeah.
You know, like, after about two, when you have a
problem, you know, you have a friend, you know, you
have a friend, you have a friend, you have a friend,
you have a friend, you have a friend, you have a
friend, you have a friend, you have a friend, you
have a friend, you have a friend, you have a friend,
until
75. He said, So
we have to have a strategy to do something about
neutrality, to guarantee the protest, and to have
a regional committee, like the 30th, the 31st
30th, In 1954,
in 1954,
we have great companies, we have Chinese, we have
Indonesia,
we have Chinese, we have India, we have Poland, we
have 100, now we have 2 presidents, we have 500,
1000, 1 president, 2 presidents, 1 is the
communist, Once
India and Burma and some other republics had
become non-trivial. We need to have a system to
guarantee that we cannot live alone. We take a
road, a way to survive alone. Thank
you very much. You're welcome. Thank
you
very much. I appreciate this.